before you grab your pitchforks I am
going to keep the fairphone 5 around I
am a big believer in their mission to
build more repairable more sustainable
and more ethically sourced phones and
with software updates planned all the
way through 2031 there is plenty of time
for improvements which is good because
of things like this what is this to be
fair to fairphone according to a January
email the two handsets that were
delivered to us on August 31st 2023 are
final prototypes and not part of the
retail production run that started
shipping to customers 2 weeks later
fairphone revealed that in the ramp up
to full production they turned up some
cases of bad soldering mic failures and
antenna issues that were solved for the
mass production run so the units we
evaluated aren't technically mass
production units but none of the changes
that fairphone disclosed were likely to
impact our experience with the device
anyway with that grain of salt out of
the way let's just rip the Band-Aid off
and tell you about our sponsor melric
their allnew boob 75 is a fully
assembled Ultra customizable aluminum
keyboard with pre- lubed magnetic
switches and stabilizers so you can
Boogie all night long and by Boogie I
mean use your cool keyboard just listen
to how good it
sounds right out of the box I was
immediately enamored with the optional
transparent back it looks so cool it's
plastic so you don't have to worry about
it shattering and it effortlessly pops
off so you can get to the battery and
the rest of the guts it's like a little
trick back in time but in a really good
way migration to the fairphone was
painless and I love the fingerprint
sensor being built into the power button
on the side okay that's the oldfashioned
way of doing things but it is so much
faster than an unders screen sensor
especially the one I was using on the LG
Wing speaking of oldfashioned though
there is a lot going going on here
that's less oh quaint and more what year
is it for instance peering through the
transparent back I found no obvious
signs of wireless charging and while
it's not the kind of thing that I use
that often it still feels like a bit of
a bummer and I feel the same way about
the placement of the nano SIM and micro
SD slots they are under the battery I
mean don't get me wrong I'm grateful
they're included at all and the battery
is not glued in making it super easy to
remove but why do I need to power down
my phone in order to pop in an SD card
flipping things over the display is fine
I guess I noticed a yellow tint to it
when it's off AIS more than I'm used to
seeing on a modern OLED and just like
the fairphone 4 the bezels are as large
as they are nonuniform with the top and
bottom having at least an extra SE of
thickness compared to the sides though
that is nothing compared to the profile
view of this B bad boy damn boy damn boy
it's about on par with my wife's s23
Ultra and that's with a dbrand
protective case installed on it and it
comes with a weight to match 212 G are
about 7 and 1 half Freedom ounces at
least we accounted for that when we
designed our new LT lounge pants so
comfy and available now at LTT store.com
you know what else feels like time
travel I can't remember the last time I
did a phone review and I felt like I
needed to have a performance and
responsiveness section I mean maybe I've
been spoiled by more premium devices but
the fairphone 5 really did feel more
like my ancient note 9 than a modern
phone we conducted our Labs testing
alongside both a pixel 8 which was
chosen for its comparable price and a
Galaxy Note 5 that had a new battery and
a fresh install of lineage OS in order
to put the performance of the fairphone
in the appropriate
context and that is a exactly as
flattering as it sounds we're going to
have all three phones linked down below
honestly I think our biggest surprise
was the Note 5 not in every way mind you
its gaming performance wasn't amazing
it's 8 years old and doesn't even
support all the latest and greatest
Graphics extensions but for General
phone chat browser use it's pretty darn
responsive about on par with the
fairphone 5 to the untrained Observer at
least if you don't turn the 90 HZ
display on on the fairphone 5 though
there are some reasons that we wouldn't
do that and we'll talk about those later
now of course the fairphone did beat out
the note in more of our controlled tests
but not by as much as you'd expect and
against contemporary competition the
fair phone
fars even worse not only did the pixel 8
outperform it in all but one of our
tests the one test where it didn't lose
was the time to fully charge the battery
and even then it was a tie also once
charged the pixel lasted twice as long
before it was fully discharged Ah that's
why 90 HZ is off by default this
probably comes down to fairphone's
Unorthodox choice of s so they went with
the Qualcomm qcm 6490 which tldr is not
a phone chip rather it's optimized for
long-term Industrial and Commercial iot
applications it's a cool chip it
supports an impressive list of Wireless
Technologies including Wi-Fi 6E with 8
by8 multi-user mimo which is absolutely
unheard of in a phone and crucially it
will enjoy long-term support from
qualcom enabling fairphone to continue
to provide updates to this thing for
years to come unfortunately its cryo 670
cores are based on older armed designs
that just can't compete with modern
chips though to be honest with you the
raw performance was far from my only
issue with this thing remember that
fingerprint sensor that I started out
loving both it and the volume buttons
are not actually proud enough to be
easily found by touch and I was
constantly pressing one when I meant to
press the other the vibration is
inexcusably weak compared to our
Challengers making it easy to miss a
phone call when it's sitting in my
pocket and compounding this issue while
the maximum ringer volume of 87 DB is
right on par with the comparison phones
the fairphone 5's minimum ringer volume
is 71 DB that is about 15 DB higher than
the competition which is perceived as
almost three times as
loud that is really
really
loud so my options were to either miss
my calls by having it on vibrate or
annoy the heck out of everyone around me
now admittedly I can be a bit of a
special case at least that's what my mom
says but guys I can't be the only one
who needs to know when someone is trying
to get a hold of me and this alone was
enough to be a deal breaker while we're
talking about special me I've been daily
driving Samsung phones for a long time
and I have developed a bit of a
preference for how Samsung does things
which led to my next deal breaker on the
fair phone I cannot move the back button
over to the right side I'm sorry but
without that this lands squarely in the
neat phones that will never be my daily
driver pile making matters worse I can't
even move the stock Google widget up and
down without using a custom launcher
really and guys I am just getting
started on the skin a long press doesn't
present an uninstall option for an app
just app info I missed call screening on
this thing a lot screenshot editing and
sharing sucks and Plex would just stop
responding entirely very regularly
though admittedly that could be Plex
just being a steaming pile of garbage
and this is just a pet peeve of mine I
couldn't find any way to have it
automatically proceed when the correct
pin is entered I gu get it pressing okay
is a security feature but I don't like
the extra keystrokes on top of all that
I experienced a significant amount of
just downright buggy Behavior with the
worst being audio problems I think what
was happening was that even though the
fairphone lost its headphone jack in the
great Bluetooth War it would sometimes
experience Phantom headphone jack
syndrome making it so that both the
speaker and the earpiece would stay
silent it was really bizarre like on a
phone call I could get it to work in
speaker and then if I was watching a
YouTube video I would get no audio at
all so the hardware is working fairphone
told us this was an issue that they saw
in early devices but then every time I
experienced it a reboot would clear it
up which indicates to me that it's a
software issue let us know in the
comments by the way if you've run into
this with your fairphone 5 uh let's see
what else uh oh the screen brightness
bounced around like my kids at a
birthday party from our testing it looks
like pair phone doesn't do anything to
smooth out the sensor data or the
transitions between their brightness
levels and they also use a fairly small
variable to store the ambient brightness
reading compared to other phones the
result is very distracting especially
when you're watching content in a dimly
lit room where the light from the
phone's own screen bouncing around the
room and hitting the sensor will cause
it to constantly change as it switches
from one scene to the
next uh camera didn't use it a ton when
I did the results were oversaturated
oversharpened and generally
overprocessed I mean don't get me wrong
it's a lot better than my ancient note 9
as far as rear camera quality goes but
if you put it up against anything modern
like the pixel or an s23 ultra there's
just no comparison I also found that the
dynamic range and auto exposure of the
selfie camera especially for shooting
videos was not amazing it's just it's
the kind of thing that tier ones spend a
lot of time and money on and I feel like
we just kind of take for granted until
we don't have it to be clear there were
positives too the running apps
notification in the shade kind of
nice okay I kid there there are there
are more of them the repairability
legitimately really cool and they've
obviously put considerable effort into
making things as straightforward as
possible if you need to replace a part
but if I'm being honest I feel like
they've almost overshot the mark and
they've made some unnecessary
compromises compared to our humble Note
5 for example other than the initial
hassle of removing the back it's not
actually that much harder to work on I
mean you need to give it a bit of a
drink of isopropyl alcohol to release
the adhesive on the battery but after
that it's a pretty easy swap you got the
same ribbon cables the same tiny screws
tiny plugs they're all the same size but
Samsung did it without turning their
phone into a freaking weapon
for that you had to wait for the Note 7
heyo ancient Zing Samsung it kind of
seems to me that by going the extra mile
and turning everything into modules
fairphone has solved some problems but
they've also created some new ones
leaving them with a device that is in
their own words a fair phone not a great
phone and unless you desperately want to
support their mission or your needs are
extremely basic and you just like
spending more money I don't know how to
craft a recommendation for this thing I
mean maybe if they turned the S so RAM
and storage into a module as well so you
could swap that out and upgrade it but
even then a part of me would feel so
much better just steering you toward
rescuing an old Note 5 from the shelter
rather than adopting a brand new one of
these and steering you toward our
sponsor manscaped when the overgrowth is
starting down in your undergarden cut it
away with manscaped lawnmower 5.0 its
trimmer blade and foil blade are
interchangeable letting you choose
between basic buzz cut or pitbull smooth
not the dog breed the guy who shouts
Dolly the lawnmower 5.0 even comes with
an LED light to navigate through those
more voluminous spots as you conduct
your hunt for the Red October it also
charges conveniently with a USBC cable
couple that with its portability and you
can whack the weeds anywhere you might
be though please check any local
statutes on public weed whacking
beforehand check out the lawnmower 5.0
at manscape.com techtips and use code
techtips for 20% off and free shipping
if you guys enjoyed this video the
fairphone 5 isn't available in North
America yet so hey why not check out our
review of the last Gen fairphone 4